Introduction
--------------
Red Colony is composed of people from around the world who are interested in the possibilities that colonization and Terraforming of Mars may bring. We feel that our dreams will be accomplished through support of private funding and corporate investment, not through government agencies. A shortsighted US Congress has limited NASA's potential in recent years and has left it only to dream of a manned mission to Mars. Avoiding the problems of relying only on government programs for our future in space and on Mars we at Red Colony exist to discuss, support and promote the many alternative space development plans for Mars in the future. Our mission is to discuss, debate and support development of an immense and realistic plan to colonize and terraform Mars, and to educate the world as to its importance. By focusing on public outreach via our forums, we can discuss, debate and promote more theories in these evolving fields and open Mars to the collective knowledge of the entire world.

Our Mission Statement

To educate and to inform - To educate the general public from a layman’s perspective about the advantages and possibilities of terraforming and colonizing Mars and our solar system. To promote in the general public a view of these issues as being highly relevant and applicable to today’s priorities. To inform members of the private sector who join us as to the benefits that investment in Mars colonization offers, and to initiate a popular acceptance of the priority of human settlement and Terraforming of Mars.
To develop and to debate - To offer colonization and terraforming enthusiasts, novices and experts, the opportunity to share their ideas and theories online and in small groups via our chat feature. To develop and advocate new theories about colonization and terraforming. To see that all developed and scientific theories regarding terraforming and colonization are considered. To publish these theories online and possibly in scientific literature.
Our global community spans students and professionals, enthusiasts and laymen alike, all with an interest in seeing humans on Mars. From science to science fiction, our visitors have the chance to submit their ideas in articles, short stories, and even novels. Their work is read by other enthusiasts, and their ideas are discussed in detail. Through peer-readership, every idea can be considered and every facet of human knowledge consulted. Our community is active and growing, each member playing an important role in support of Mars's advancement. If you want to participate, feel free to register for a Forum name or submit your ideas. 

There are many articles and fictional stories and novels about Mars on the site. If you already have something you’d like to submit to us, visit the Submit Work page. The Control Panel offers some cool options for customizing the appearance of the site. Frans Blok's Future of Mars section offers a click-able, zoom-able map of the surface of a possible terraformed Mars, filled with a history and description of every region of the planet. The Mars Pic of the Day is a feature that can be added to your own website, automatically bringing you a new image of Mars every day. Finally, our News Archive stretches back to 2000, and it offers a great history of the evolution of this field.

But Red Colony is also proud to have played a major role in Mars advocacy via our open forums that allow the promotion of the best of ideas, including giving feedback for members and leaders of groups like The Mars Society and MarsDrive. www.marsdrive.com started out as Red Colony's public relations campaign, a massive project founded to popularize the importance of Mars in mass media such as newspapers, magazines, television, and film and has grown into a separate group with many fantastic and inspiring goals of its own including their annual Mars Sample Return Competition. These projects are open to the entire world, regardless of association with any organization.

On the left-hand side of the site, the navigation bar can lead you anywhere. You can learn why colonizing Mars is so important and how Red Colony differs from other Mars organizations.

Our philosophy has always been to leave to the people what is best for the people. We believe in the "free-market" of the scientific and Mars enthusiast community, where a person can act on his own, without any restrictions, and where the greatest qualities he or she may have are able to surface. As the famous writer and poet, Antoine de Saint-Exupery, said, "If you want to build a ship, don't herd people together to collect wood and don't assign them tasks and work, but rather teach them to long for the endless immensity of the sea."

